DESIGN OF THRUST CHAMBERS AND OTHER COMBUSTION DEVICES 89
The total surface area of the combustion
chamber walls excluding injector face can be
approximated by the following expression:
Total area = 2LcY TTfcAt + csc e«(c - l)Ae (4-6)
Nozzle Expansion Area Ratio
It was learned earlier that with all other
parameters fixed, in particular chamber pressure,
there is only one optimum nozzle expansion area
ratio for a given altitude or, more specifically,
ambient pressure. Except for those systems
which start in vacuum, ambient pressure will
have to be considered. This is especially true
for boosters which start at or near sea-level
conditions.
It is the ultimate purpose of a rocket engine
to lift vehicles to altitudes. Inherently, then,
ambient pressure will not be a constant (except
for high-altitude starts, as mentioned). It is,
therefore, extremely important for the designer to
know the trajectory of the vehicle to be propelled
or, more specifically, its altitude-versus-time
characteristics. With this information, the designer is in a position to make a first, optimizing
selection of a nozzle expansion area ratio, for
best results throughout the entire trajectory. As
shown earlier, area ratio will be truly optimum
for only one speCific altitude. The optimization
for ambient pressure then is essentially an
averaging process.
Other considerations usually cause the designer to deviate from the "paper optimum" for
the nozzle expansion area ratio. Some of the
most common are: weight, size, ease of manufacturing, handling, and cooling (heat transfer)
considerations.
Nozzle Shape
Most rocket nozzles are of the convergingdiverging De Laval type. Since the flow velocity
of the gases in the converging section of rocket
nozzle is relatively low, any smooth and wellrounded convergent nozzle section will have
very low energy losses. By contrast, the contour
of the diverging nozzle section is very important
to performance, because of the very high flow
velocities involved.
The selection of an optimum nozzle shape for
a given expansion area ratio is generally influenced by the following design considerations
and goals:
(1) Uniform parallel axial gas flow at the
nozzle exit for maximum momentum
vector
(2) Minimum separation and turbulence losses
within the nozzle
(3) Shortest possible nozzle length for minimum space envelope, weight, wall friction losses, and cooling requirements
(4) Ease of manufacturing
In actual design practice, any abrupt change or
discontinuity in the nozzle wall contour should
be avoided to eliminate the possibility of shock
waves or turbulence losses. Theoretically, the
nozzle throat is simply the unique plane of minimum cross-section area. In practice, a wellrounded throat section is employed. Only at the
nozzle exit plane is a sharp edge used because
a rounded one would permit overexpansion and
flow separation.
1. Conical Nozzle
In early rocket engine applications, the conical nozzle, which had proved satisfactory in
most respects, was used almost exclusively.
The advantages of a conical nozzle are ease of
manufacturing and flexibility of converting an
existing design to higher or lower expansion area
ratios without major redesign of the nozzle contour.
The configuration of a typical conical nozzle
is shown in figure 4-10. The nozzle throat section has the contour of a circular arc with a
radius R ranging from 0.5 to 1.5 times the throat
radius Re. The half angle of the nozzle convergent cone section can range from 20° to 45°. Th
