4.1 THE BASIC THRUST CHAMBER
ELEMENTS
The thermodynamic processes governing the
generation of thrust within a thrust chamber have
been treated in chapter 1. The primary function
of the thrust chamber is to convert the energy of
propellants into thrust. In a liquid bipropellant
rocket engine, this process is characterized by
the following basic functional steps:
1. The liquid propellants, at their proper mixture ratio, are injected into the combustion chamber through orifices in an injector, as jets at
velocities ranging from 20 to 150 feet per second.
These jets either impinge to form a mixed droplet spray, or run straight into the chamber hot
gas as a series of droplets. Part of the combustion reaction may already take place in the liquid
state.
2. The droplets are subsequently vaporized
by heat transfer from the surrounding gas. The
size and velocity of the droplets change continuously during their entrainment in the combustion
gas flow.
3. The vaporized propellants are mixed rapidly, further heated and promptly reacted at their
stoichiometric mixture ratio where ever they are
formed, thus effecting a continuous increase of
the gaseous mass flow rate within the combustion chamber. This gas reaction is further aided
by the high-speed diffusion of active molecules
or atoms. The combustion is essentially complete upstream of the chamber throat, when all
liquid droplets have been vaporized. Under certain conditions, shock and detonation waves may
be generated by local disturbances in the combustion front, possibly caused by instability of
mixing process and propellant now prior to reaction. These effects may trigger sustained pressure oscillations at certain frequencies within
the thrust chamber, resulting in destructive combustion instability. A major portion of the design and development effort, therefore, is directed
toward achievement of stable combustion.
4. As the gaseous products of the combustion
process pass toward and through the throat, they
are accelerated to sonic, and then to supersonic,
velocities within the diverging nozzle section,
and are finally ejected to the rear.
The basic elements of a thrust chamber required for its function, include a combustion
chamber section, an expansion nozzle section,
an injector, an ignition device (for nonhypergolic
propellant combinations), propellant inlets and
distributing manifolds, and interconnecting surfaces for,component and thrust mounts. The construction of the various thrust chamber elements
depends largely on their specific operational
function. However, low weight and Simplicity,
which make manufacturing easier, are two important factors to be considered at all times.
81
-
. . 82 DESIGN OF LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINES
Figures 4-1 and 4-2 ill trate a typical liquid
bipropellant rocket en ine thrust chamber assembly. The illustrat&d thrust c amber assembly i s
composed of four major subassemblies or basic
el ements; namel y , thrust chamber body, injector,
liquid oxygen dome, and i gniter.
The thrust chamber body subassembly j s of a
venturi shape, consistm[,: of a cylindrical section
in which th combustion occurs ; a section narrowing toward a throat; and a bell-shaped, expanding nozzl e section throug/ which the combustion gases are expelled (fig. 4-1). The body
wall of this chamber is constructed of nickel
tubes running longitudinally, j oined by ~il ver
brazing, and retained by external tension bands .
The tubes , of 0.012-inch waH thickness, are of
rectangular cross section of varying area, to
conform to the thrust cha mber shape. This construction permits simple thrust chamber cooling
during operation, by flow:ing fuel through the
tubes which form the chamber wall. The ~uel ,
under pressure, enters t e th;ust chamber bod,
at the fuel manifold inlet and is distributed to
alternate thrust-chaml:> r tubes . It then 110ws
down toward the thrust chamber nozzle exit
where the fuel return manifold reverses the flow
Fi ure 4-1. -7'hru t chambl?r a sembly.
into the return tubes . The fuel then flows
through an inje tor fuel creen into the radial
injector passages, and finally through th fuel
injector orifices 'nto the thrust chamber combustion zone. The fuel manifolds of this chamber
are made of 4130 steel or 347 stainless steel.
Other structural members, such as tension bands ,
stiffening rin s, and outrig ers wer all made of
4130 steel. The oxid ' zer (liquid oxygen) enter
the LOX dome under pressure through a screened
central port and is distributed within the dome
directly to the liquid oxygen passages and
orifices (fig. 4-2).
The following are the operating characteri -
tics and principal dimensions of a hypothetical
thrust chamber similar to the one shown in figure
4- 1:
1. Pro llant . ....... . .......... . .... LOXf RP-l
2. Of F mi;uure ratio ................... 2.30
3. Charac teri ti c velocit , c* , ftlsec . ... 5400
4. Thmst coefficient, C( (£ ea ~vel) . .. .. 1.489
5. Specific impulse (lshc (sea level),
sec .......... . ............ . ...... 249
6. Total propell ant now rate. Ibl ec ..... 402
7. Thmst ( ea l evel), lb ... .. . .. ..... .. 100000
8. Chamber pre s ure (i nje ctor end), p ia . 520
9. Chamber pre ure (nozzle stagnation),
psia ..... .. .. . ... .. . . .......... . . 480 

10. Average gas specific heat ratio (y) . ... 1.233
11. Combustion chamber cross·section
area. in 2 ...•....•..........•..... 244
(at injector)
12. Throat area. in 2 .................... 140
13. Nozzle exit area. in2. ............... 1120
14. Combustion chamber volume. in3 ...... 5320
(above the throat)
15. Combustion chamber length. in ....... 28.5
(injector to throat)
16. Characteristic chamber length. L*. in .38
17. Overall thrust chamber length. in ..... 73
18. Design contraction area ratio. fC ..•... 1.60: 1
19. Design expansion area ratio. f ........ 8: 1
The thrust chamber injector (fig. 4-2) is a
round plate. honeycombed with circular and radial
inner passages. leading to drilled orifices. It is
constructed of 4130 steel with nickel-plated surfaces. and held in position at the fuel manifold
below the liquid oxygen dome with high-strength
bolts. The seals between injector and thrust
chamber body are of the O-ring type, made of
rub0er selected for compatibility with the fuel
(RP-l). A threaded hole is provided in the center of the injector face to permit pyrotechnic
thrust chamber igniter installation. The injector
has 20 circular concentric copper rings which
contain the injection orifices and are fed from
the main propellant systems. Fuel and oxidizer
are kept separate by an elaborate distribution
system. feeding alternate rings. Fuel flows
through the outermost ring. through each alternate inner ring. and through a central fuel disk
which is separately fed from an igniter fuel val ve
through an ignition fuel inlet port. Liquid oxygen emerges from the remaining rings. The injection orifices are so angled that the propellants impinge in the thrust-chamber combustion
zone in a like-on-like pattern (liquid oxygen on
liquid oxygen and fuel on fuel). The primary
orifices are arranged in pairs. with a 0.416-inch
distance between centerlines and a 40° included
impingement angle. for both propellants. In other
designs. impingement angles or orifice separations are made different for the two propellants.
so as to effect their impingement in different
planes (multiplanar impingement as opposed to
uni planar) .
The liquid oxygen dome is a single-piece.
2014-T6 aluminum-alloy die forging. It provides
the inlet for the liquid oxygen. It also serves as
the thrust-chamber-t'o-vehicle attachment interface. The flanges of the liquid oxygen dome and
the injector are sealed by a spiral-wound gasket
made of 304 stainless-steel strips with asbestos
fillers. This type of gasket is designed specifically for cryogenic and elevated-temperature
applications.
The electrically fired pyrotechnic igniter is
secured centrally to the injector surface by
means of a threaded joint. It is designed for one
start only and must be replaced after each firing.
It receives an electrical firing signal from wires
connected through the nozzle exit.
4.2 THRUST CHAMBER PERFORMANCE
PARAMETERS
The significance of the parameters which
express or influence the efficiency of thrust
chamber operation has been discussed in section
l.3 of chapter 1. Before discussing the details
of actual thrust chamber design. the following
summarizes these parameters and illustrates
their use for design calculations by applying
them to the engine systems of the Alpha vehicle
which was discussed in chapter III.
Specific Impulse. Is (sec)
From equations 1-31 and 1-31c:
The speCific impulse figure indicates the
overall quality of the thrust-chamber design. As
was learned earlier. it shows how much thrust is
generated for what "running propellant expenditures. ~
Characteristic Velocity, c* (rt/sec)
From equation 1-32a:
(4-1)
Assuming that the propellant and mixture ratio
selection has been made. it can be expected that
the gas properties (y. R) will fall into a known
band. From there on. c* almost entirely depends
on the temperature of the gases. Obviously. this
temperature has a theoretical maximum for a
selected propellant combination. 
