SYMBOLS
BN bearing number, Re/GRAOP
C hydrostatic-bearing radial clearance, mm (in.)
Os hydrostatic-bearing surface diameter, mm (in.)
E eccentricity ratio, e/C
e eccentricity or journal deflection, mm (in.)
GRAOP modified Reynolds number based on axial pressure flow,
(GRAOPS)(PR)OS/(L - w)
GRAOPS Reynolds number based on axial pressure flow, (Ps - Pa)C3/R(p)v
K statlc stlffness, N/cm (lbf/in.)
K dlmenslonless stiffness, K(e)/(Ps - Pa)L(Ds)
L journal axial length, mm (in.)
LOFlO load-to-flow ratio, W(C 4)/e(m)v(L)Os
m mass flow rate through the hydrostatic bearing, g/sec (lbm/sec)
PR pocket pressure ratio, (Pr - Pa)/Ps - Pa)
Pa sump pressure, MPa (psia)
Pr pocket pressure, MPa (psia)
Ps bearing inlet pressure, MPa (psia)
R radius of the hydrostatic bearing, mm (in.)
Re Reynolds number, U(C)/2
U journal surface velocity, mm/sec (in./sec)
W load applled to the bearlng, N (lbf)
2
W dimensionless load, W/(Ps - Pa)L(Ds)
w axial length of pocket, mm (in.)
a attitude angle, deg
~ inlet fluid viscosity, N sec/mm2 (lbf sec/in.2)
v inlet fluid kinematic viscosity, mm2/sec (in.2/sec)
APPARATUS
Test Bearing
A schematic of the hybrid-hydrostatic-bearing assembly and its design
details are shown in figure 1. Design details of the hybrid hydrostatic bearing were reported in reference 3. Table I contains critical dimensions of the
two hydrostatic-bearing configurations tested. Fabrication of two sets of
hardware resulted in some dimensional differences, mainly affecting the clearance between the journal and the hydrostatic bearing surface. Liquid hydrogen
was supplied to the hydrostatic bearing through twenty orifice-compensated
pockets that were arranged in two staggered rows of ten equally spaced pockets.
The rolling element of the hybrid bearing consisted of two angular-contact,
20-mm-bore ball bearings. The ball bearings, which were preloaded by a spring
washer, act at system startup and shutdown to prevent wear of the hydrostatic
bearing and at system startup to prevent high-friction torque.
The clearance between the journal and the hydrostatic bearing surface is
a critical design parameter for determining the stiffness of and the fluid flow
through a hydrostatic bearing. The value of the fluid-film clearance at room
temperature and zero rotational speed changes when the hybrid bearing is operating at liquid-hydrogen temperatures and high speed depending on the materials
involved. Inconel 718 with a thin, dense chrome plating was used for the journal material, and 316 stainless steel with an electro-deposited silver plating
was used for the hydrostatic bearing. When thermal-expansion coefficients were
used for these materials, calculations indicated that a temperature decrease
from ambient to 21 K (37 OR) resulted in a O.Ol-mm (0.0004-in.) decrease in
the radial clearance. A finite-element analysis was used to calculate the
growth of the journal due to fluid pressure and centrifugal forces. The 0.066
mm (0.0026 in.) radial clearance of the hydrostatic bearing at ambient
conditions was reduced to 0.035 mm (0.0014 in.) at an operating temperature of
21 K (37 OR), a speed of 90 000 rpm, and a pressure of 1.7 MPa (250 psia). The radial-loading piston consisted of a hydrostatic bearing acting over
a partial arc of the shaft. Radial loads were developed by the hydrostatic
pressure acting over the area of the bearing foot. Up to 880 N (200 lbf) could
be applied to the tester shaft center (440 N (100 lbf) per hybrid hydrostatic
bearing).
Strain-gauge pressure transducers were used to measure fluid pressures in
the tester and in the fluid lines leading to the tester. Temperatures were
measured using platinum resistance thermometers. Flow rates through the hydrostatic elements were measured by venturi flowmeters. Other flow rates were
measured by turbine flowmeters. Rotating speeds of the shaft and the journal
were measured using eddy-current and optical displacement probes that detected
the passage of notches or flats on the rotating parts. Data from the various
transducers were recorded by a minicomputer-controlled, digital dataacquisition system. The hybrid hydrostatic bearing on the free end of the test
rig was instrumented to monitor its motion with two orthogonally mounted eddycurrent displacement probes that penetrated the test rig and viewed the journal. PROClDURE
Assembly and Pretest
The shaft assembly was balanced in three steps. First, the hydrostaticbearing journals were balanced individually. Next, the shaft was completely
assembled and then balanced while rotating on the ball bearings. Finally, the
balance of the shaft assembly was checked by allowing the journals to rotate
on rollers in the balancing machine. Because the position of the journal is
not constant with respect to the shaft, there is a range of values for balancing the shaft assembly. The residual unbalance for all assemblies of the shaft
was less than 0.36 g/cm (0.005 ozfin.). The balance was checked each time new
parts were added to the shaft assembly. ultrasonically cleaned in alcohol prior to assembly, and they were assembled
in a clean-room environment to minimize particulate contamination. Once assembled, the tester was sealed to prevent damage due to condensation until it
could be installed in the test facility. Each test day the installed tester
and all of the associated liquid-hydrogen systems were evacuated and then
purged with gaseous helium to prevent any contamination. 

Hydrostatic-bearing stiffness can be defined as the static radial load
applied to the hybrid bearing divided by the journal deflection. This value
is plotted against radial clearance in figure 5. Configuration and speed do
not effect stiffness except in relation to their effect on radial clearance.
The vertical lines indicate the uncertainty in the stiffness calculation due
to the accuracy limitations of the journal deflection measurements. The boundaries of the vertical lines represent ±0.0013 mm (iO.00005 in.) of measured
journal movement. These data indicate that, for the hydrostatic bearing
investigated,
Stiffness (in N/cm) = B.9lxl05 - 1.07xlOB C
Stiffness (in lbf/in.) = 5.05xl05 - 1.544x10B C
(C in cm)
(C in in.)
Figure 6 illustrates how the hydrostatic-bearing stiffness increases when
the radial clearance is coupled to the journal's rotational speed through the COMPARISON OF PREDICTED AND EXPERIMENTAL OPERATING CHARACTERISTlCS
The eccentricity e of a hybrid hydrostatic bearing can be defined as the
distance between the journal's center of rotation and the center of the hydrostatic bearing. Eccentricity ratio E is defined as the ratio of eccentricity
to radial clearance C:
e E = C
When the eccentricity ratio is equal to 1, contact between journal and
hydrostatic-bearing surfaces will occur. The relation between eccentricity
ratio and the load and speed of the bearing is shown in figure 7.
Figure 8 shows the bearing's dimensionless stiffness as a function of its
pressure ratio. The experimental values were approximately l.~ times the predicted values. This would result in a different rotor-dynamic performance
because the critical speeds would be higher than those calculated from the predicted bearing stiffness. The two-phase-flow data points in figure 8 were
recorded when the sump pressure was less than 1.03 MPa (1~0 psia) and the
.fluid-inlet temperature was less than 33 K (60 OR). Since the critical temperature and pressure for liquid hydrogen are 32.7 K and 1.30 MPa (58.9 oR and
188 psia), the increase in stiffness may be caused by fluid cavitation.
Reduced flow rates for the two-phase-flow conditions were also observed.
The phenomenon of increased stiffness and decreased flow has also been observed
in face seals (ref. 4). 