 7,887 kN (1,773,000 lbf)Thrust (Sea Level): ~7,255 kN (740 metric tons)Specific Impulse (\(I_{sp}\) Vacuum): 
338 secondsSpecific Impulse (\(I_{sp}\) Sea Level): 309 secondsPropellants: Liquid Oxygen (LOX) and 
Kerosene (RG-1 / T-6 / RP-1)Dry Weight: 9,750 kg (21,500 lbs)Power Cycle: Staged combustion (oxidizer-rich)
Design Features: 4 combustion chambers, 4 nozzles, and 1 central turbopump assembly driven by 2 preburnersTurbine Power: ~257,000 hp (192 MW)

The RD-170 liquid oxy-gen/kerosene rocket engine was de-signed in 1974-1986 at NPO Ener-gomash by a team led by Chief De-signer V.P.Radovsky for the side engine units (first stage) of the URKTS Energiya-Buran Heavy Multipurpose Space Rocket Trans-portation System. Until today, the RD-170 remains the world’s most powerful and quite promising engine design. RD-170 is a four-chamber, re-coverable liquid-propellant rocket engine with the fuel turbopump-feed system. The design provides for high-pressure afterburning of the ex-haust turbine gas in the main com-bustion chambers. The ignition of fuel components is ensured by self-igniting starting fuel. The engine’s fuel system in-cludes the Main Turbopump Unit (MTU) incorporating a single-stage active ax-ial-flow turbine co-shafted with rotors of the oxidizer and the fuel pumps. The turbopump assembly also includes two screw boost pumps: the oxidizer pump driven by the gas turbine, and the fuel pump driven by the hy-draulic turbine. The pneumatic control system includes: pressure helium bottles, solenoid-operated electro-pneumatic valves and system piping. According to Mr. Feliks Chelkis , Chief and Lead Designer of the RD-170 rocket en-gine, there is hardly another national or West-ern liquid-propellant engine showing same per-formance in terms of full-thrust gaining smoothness, which makes the loads applied to the engine and the launch vehicle considerably lower. Engine designers say development of a recoverable high-thrust power unit is a chal-lenging task. To ensure controllable throttling to full thrust and cut-off smoothness, it is vital that consumption of propellants is adequately regulated by means of powerful electro-hydraulic devices. The described engine went through full-scale development, bench trials and flight tests. Ground test-firing of the engine was conducted on a fully built-up unit. As development works continued on the RD-170 engine, the designers encountered fire accidents in the engine’s hot gas-flow duct re-sulting in that MTU assembly bearings were destroyed, in addition, there were high-frequency vibrations in the combustion cham-ber. The fire accidents were found to have been caused by the presence of foreign materi-als (like chips or fillings) in the gas ducts. Cer-tain bottlenecks in the turbopump assembly op-The RD-170 liquid oxy-gen/kerosene rocket engine was de-signed in 1974-1986 at NPO Ener-gomash by a team led by Chief De-signer V.P.Radovsky for the side engine units (first stage) of the URKTS Energiya-Buran Heavy Multipurpose Space Rocket Trans-portation System. Until today, the RD-170 remains the world’s most powerful and quite promising engine design. RD-170 is a four-chamber, re-coverable liquid-propellant rocket engine with the fuel turbopump-feed system. The design provides for high-pressure afterburning of the ex-haust turbine gas in the main com-bustion chambers. The ignition of fuel components is ensured by self-igniting starting fuel. The engine’s fuel system in-cludes the Main Turbopump Unit (MTU) incorporating a single-stage active ax-ial-flow turbine co-shafted with rotors of the oxidizer and the fuel pumps. The turbopump assembly also includes two screw boost pumps: the oxidizer pump driven by the gas turbine, and the fuel pump driven by the hy-draulic turbine. The pneumatic control system includes: pressure helium bottles, solenoid-operated electro-pneumatic valves and system piping. According to Mr. Feliks Chelkis , Chief and Lead Designer of the RD-170 rocket en-gine, there is hardly another national or West-ern liquid-propellant engine showing same per-formance in terms of full-thrust gaining smoothness, which makes the loads applied to the engine and the launch vehicle considerably lower. Engine designers say development of a recoverable high-thrust power unit is a chal-lenging task. To ensure controllable throttling to full thrust and cut-off smoothness, it is vital that consumption of propellants is adequately regulated by means of powerful electro-hydraulic devices. The described engine went through full-scale development, bench trials and flight tests. Ground test-firing of the engine was conducted on a fully built-up unit. As development works continued on the RD-170 engine, the designers encountered fire accidents in the engine’s hot gas-flow duct re-sulting in that MTU assembly bearings were destroyed, in addition, there were high-frequency vibrations in the combustion cham-ber. The fire accidents were found to have been caused by the presence of foreign materi-als (like chips or fillings) in the gas ducts. Cer-tain bottlenecks in the turbopump assembly op-

D-170:
Thrust (SL) 7.550 MN, (Vac.) 7.887 MN
Isp (SL) 	309 s, Isp (Vac.) 	338 s

F-1
Thrust 6.77 MN
Isp (SL) 	263 s, (I didn't find the Vac. info)


